Quantum mechanics allows the calculation of properties and behaviour of physical systems. It is typically applied to microscopic systems molecules atoms and sub atomic particles. It has been demonstrated to hold for complex molecules with thousands of atoms but its application to human beings raises philosophical problems such as Wigner friend and its application to the universe as a whole remains speculative. Predictions of quantum mechanics have been verified experimentally to an extremely high degree of accuracy. A fundamental feature of the theory is that it usually cannot predict with certainty what will happen but only give probabilities. Mathematically a probability is found by taking the square of the absolute value of a complex number known as a probability amplitude. This is known as the Born rule named after physicist Max Born. For example a quantum particle like an electron can be described by a wave function which associates to each point in space a probability amplitude. Applying the Born rule to these amplitudes gives a probability density function for the position that the electron will be found to have when an experiment is performed to measure it. This is the best the theory can do it cannot say for certain where the electron will be found. The Schrodinger equation relates the collection of probability amplitudes that pertain to one moment of time to the collection of probability amplitudes that pertain to another. One consequence of the mathematical rules of quantum mechanics is a tradeoff in predictability between different measurable quantities. The most famous form of this uncertainty principle says that no matter how a quantum particle is prepared or how carefully experiments upon it are arranged it is impossible to have a precise prediction for a measurement of its position and also at the same time for a measurement of its momentum. Another consequence of the mathematical rules of quantum mechanics is the phenomenon of quantum interference which is often illustrated with the double slit experiment. In the basic version of this experiment a coherent light source such as a laser beam illuminates a plate pierced by two parallel slits and the light passing through the slits is observed on a screen behind the plate. ? The wave nature of light causes the light waves passing through the two slits to interfere producing bright and dark bands on the screen a result that would not be expected if light consisted of classical particles. However the light is always found to be absorbed at the screen at discrete points as individual particles rather than waves the interference pattern appears via the varying density of these particle hits on the screen. Furthermore versions of the experiment that include detectors at the slits find that each detected photon passes through one slit (as would a classical particle) and not through both slits (as would a wave). However such experiments demonstrate that particles do not form the interference pattern if one detects which slit they pass through. Other atomic scale entities such as electrons are found to exhibit the same behavior when fired towards a double slit. This behavior is known as wave particle duality. Another counter intuitive phenomenon predicted by quantum mechanics is quantum tunnelling a particle that goes up against a potential barrier can cross it even if its kinetic energy is smaller than the maximum of the potential. In classical mechanics this particle would be trapped. Quantum tunnelling has several important consequences enabling radioactive decay nuclear fusion in stars and applications such as scanning tunnelling microscopy and the tunnel diode. When quantum systems interact the result can be the creation of quantum entanglement their properties become so intertwined that a description of the whole solely in terms of the individual parts is no longer possible. Erwin Schrodinger called entanglement the characteristic trait of quantum mechanics the one that enforces its entire departure from classical lines of thought. Quantum entanglement enables the counter intuitive properties of quantum pseudo telepathy and can be a valuable resource in communication protocols such as quantum key distribution and superdense coding. Contrary to popular misconception entanglement does not allow sending signals faster than light as demonstrated by the no communication theorem. Another possibility opened by entanglement is testing for hidden variables hypothetical properties more fundamental than the quantities addressed in quantum theory itself knowledge of which would allow more exact predictions than quantum theory can provide. A collection of results most significantly Bell theorem have demonstrated that broad classes of such hidden variable theories are in fact incompatible with quantum physics. According to Bell theorem if nature actually operates in accord with any theory of local hidden variables then the results of a Bell test will be constrained in a particular quantifiable way. Many Bell tests have been performed using entangled particles and they have shown results incompatible with the constraints imposed by local hidden variables. It is not possible to present these concepts in more than a superficial way without introducing the actual mathematics involved understanding quantum mechanics requires not only manipulating complex numbers but also linear algebra differential equations group theory and other more advanced subjects. Accordingly this article will present a mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics and survey its application to some useful and oft studied examples. The rules of quantum mechanics assert that the state space of a system is a Hilbert space and that observables of the system are Hermitian operators acting on vectors in that space – although they do not tell us which Hilbert space or which operators. These can be chosen appropriately in order to obtain a quantitative description of a quantum system a necessary step in making physical predictions. An important guide for making these choices is the correspondence principle a heuristic which states that the predictions of quantum mechanics reduce to those of classical mechanics in the regime of large quantum numbers. One can also start from an established classical model of a particular system and then try to guess the underlying quantum model that would give rise to the classical model in the correspondence limit. This approach is known as quantization. When quantum mechanics was originally formulated it was applied to models whose correspondence limit was non relativistic classical mechanics. For instance the well known model of the quantum harmonic oscillator uses an explicitly non relativistic expression for the kinetic energy of the oscillator and is thus a quantum version of the classical harmonic oscillator. Complications arise with chaotic systems which do not have good quantum numbers and quantum chaos studies the relationship between classical and quantum descriptions in these systems. Quantum decoherence is a mechanism through which quantum systems lose coherence and thus become incapable of displaying many typically quantum effects quantum superpositions become simply probabilistic mixtures and quantum entanglement becomes simply classical correlations. Quantum coherence is not typically evident at macroscopic scales except maybe at temperatures approaching absolute zero at which quantum behavior may manifest macroscopically. Many macroscopic properties of a classical system are a direct consequence of the quantum behavior of its parts. For example the stability of bulk matter (consisting of atoms and molecules which would quickly collapse under electric forces alone) the rigidity of solids and the mechanical thermal chemical optical and magnetic properties of matter are all results of the interaction of electric charges under the rules of quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics has had enormous success in explaining many of the features of our universe with regards to small scale and discrete quantities and interactions which cannot be explained by classical methods. Quantum mechanics is often the only theory that can reveal the individual behaviors of the subatomic particles that make up all forms of matter (electrons protons neutrons photons and others). Solid state physics and materials science are dependent upon quantum mechanics. In many aspects modern technology operates at a scale where quantum effects are significant. Important applications of quantum theory include quantum chemistry quantum optics quantum computing superconducting magnets light emitting diodes the optical amplifier and the laser the transistor and semiconductors such as the microprocessor medical and research imaging such as magnetic resonance imaging and electron microscopy. Explanations for many biological and physical phenomena are rooted in the nature of the chemical bond most notably the macro molecule DNA.